<!--
.. title: HW10
.. slug: algo_hw10
.. date: 2021-04-23 18:26:01 UTC-04:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. has_math: True
.. type: text
-->

# **Due Date**: April 29, before midnight (11:59:59PM)

This assignment comprises both written questions and
implementation-based lab.

---

# HW10

Answer the following questions from the DPV book: i) Q7.17, ii) Q7.21


# Lab10: Network Flow

Implement the Edmonds-Karp maximum flow algorithm described in
[Lecture24](https://www.cs.rpi.edu/~zaki/CS2300/pdf/Lecture24-4-22-21.pdf).
In particular, for Edmonds-Karp start from the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm described in Section
7.2, with the only difference being that you need to always find the shortest
$s$-$t$ path (via BFS, assuming edge weight 1) when finding augmenting
paths (see Section 7.2.5).

Your code should output the final i) maxflow value, ii) the actual flow
along each edge.

You can test you code on the simple example from the book chapter, using
source $s$ and sink $t$:

    s a 3
    s b 3
    s c 4
    a d 2
    b a 10
    b d 1
    c e 5
    d c 1
    d e 1
    d t 2
    e t 5

Here the maxflow value is 7, and the flow is:

    {('s', 'a'): 2, ('a', 'd'): 2, ('d', 't'): 2, ('s', 'c'): 4, ('c', 'e'): 4, ('e', 't'): 5, ('s', 'b'): 1, ('b', 'd'): 1, ('d', 'e'): 1})


# Bonus 

In addition to the maxflow and the actual flow, compute the minimum cut
value and the actual cut comprising the two subsets of vertices. For the
example graph above, the output should be:

    mincut ['s', 'a', 'b'], ['c', 'd', 'e', 't']
    mincut value 7

---

## Grading

Use submitty to submit a PDF with the output and one .py script. The output
on TBD graph should be submitted. Your code should take as input the name of
the graph file and the source and sink vertex, e.g., **lab10.py example.txt
0 49**; here 0 is the source vertex and 49 the sink vertex.

---

## Policy on Academic Honesty

You are free to discuss how to tackle the assignment, but all coding
must be your own. Please do not copy or modify code from anyone else,
including code on the web. Any students caught violating the academic
honesty principle will get an automatic F grade on the course and will
be referred to the dean of students for disciplinary action.

