<!--
.. title: CSCI2300 Syllabus 
.. slug: algo_syllabus
.. date: 2021-01-22 15:16:31 UTC-04:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. has_math: True
.. type: text
-->

## Introduction

This course presents fundamental ideas and techniques of modern
algorithm design and analysis. After completing this course, students
should be able to analyze and design efficient algorithms for a variety
of computational problems. Students will learn a variety of algorithm
design techniques, how to apply them to different problems, and how to
choose which technique should be used for which problem.


## Learning Objectives

The goal of this course is to provide a strong foundation in algorithms
in preparation for jobs in industry or for more
advanced courses. Algorithms are the basic language of computer science.
After taking this course, you, the student, should be able to:

- Understand the correctness of, and analyze the running times of, different algorithms.

- Use different algorithm-design techniques, including, but not limited
 to, greedy, divide-and-conquer, and dynamic programming techniques, to
 solve particular problems.

- Model real problems abstractly using the language of graphs and flows.

- Solve problems by reducing to other problems whose solution is known,
 and show that problems are hard by reducing from other problems.

- Make intelligent decisions about alternative data structures and
 algorithmic techniques in the context of practical problems, choosing
 from existing data structures and algorithms or designing your own
 when necessary.

## Textbook

The **required** course textbook is
[Algorithms](http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~dasgupta/book/index.html) by
Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and Vazirani. See also the textbook errata.

Although the lectures will mostly be drawn from the textbook, we will
still cover things that do not appear in the text, and the textbook
includes material that we will not cover in class. You are responsible
for the content of the lectures as well as any assigned readings. You
may also find the following books useful for reference and for different
perspectives:

- Cormen/Leiserson/Rivest/Stein: Introduction to Algorithms.

- Kleinberg/Tardos: Algorithm Design. 

All lecture notes and videos will be posted online on the course
webpage. 


## Prerequisites

The pre-requisites for this course are CSCI-1200 Data Structures and
CSCI-2200 FOCS. We will assume that everyone has seen the material in
these courses, and will use it as necessary.

The labs involve programming in Python (v3+), and you are expected to be
a competent programmer coming in -- the lectures will not discuss any
code. The TAs and undergraduate mentors can provide some help on
programming issues in lab. The textbook also does not deal with
programming issues. You may want to consult your textbooks from previous
courses.

## Website and Announcements

We will make extensive use of the course website and Campuswire. You are
responsible for checking the course website regularly for announcements
and course materials, as well as your e-mail for communications related
to the class.


## Lectures & Videos

Students are highly encouraged to attend all classes. You are
responsible for all material covered and announcements made in lecture.

The lecture PDF and Video will be posted on the course webpage after
each class, typically before 5pm on each class day.

## Grading Policy

Your grade will be determined using two components: *ExamGrade* and
*AssignmentGrade*.

- **Exams**: There will be two midterm exams in class (see the class
 schedule for the exact dates), and a comprehensive final exam during
 finals week. Your *ExamGrade* is made up to the two midterms (30% each)
 and the final (40%), for a total of 100%. Exams will be "live"
 during the 6:45-8:55PM slots on Monday and during the finals week.

 All exams are open-textbook and open-notes. You are
 **not** permitted to search online, or collaborate or copy from others,
 which are all breaches of academic integrity. 

 We will not provide make-up exams unless we receive an [excused
 absence](https://success.studentlife.rpi.edu/current-students/academic-and-personal-goals/requesting-excused-absence).
 Any students with special accommodations must notify the instructor
 during the first two weeks of class with official approval.

Your *AssignmentGrade* is made up of the following categories: 

- **Labs and HW**: Lab assignments and HWs will be given throughout
  the semester, typically every 1-2 weeks. These can include an
  implementation component and also written questions.  HWs will be due
  on Thursdays, just before midnight. Labs/HW make up 80% of your
  *AssignmentGrade*.


- **Mandatory Recitations and Office Hours**: Students are **required** to attend the
 recitations held by the TAs and Mentors every wednesday, during the
 slot corresponding to your section. Make sure that the TA/mentors have
 recorded your attendance. The goal of the recitation sections is for
 the students to seek help and ask questions about the HW/lab during
 those office hours, and also any other questions they may have about
 the course material. You must start your HW/labs before wed, since this
 is your chance to clarify any doubts in a live session. Recitations
 make up 20% of your *AssignmentGrade*.

- **Lecture Viewing and Quizzes**: We may pilot the ability to track
    lecture viewing and inserted post-class quizzes. In that case, 20%
    of the assignment grade may be be assigned to this component.

Your final grade will be the **minimum** of your exam grade and
assignment grade. Students are encouraged to participate in the class
via attendance, discussions, and engagement on the Campuswire forum.
Bonus engagement points will be awarded to the students in proportion to
their participation. 

## Homeworks

All assignments and exams will be submitted online via
[Submitty](https://submitty.cs.rpi.edu/courses/s21/csci2300sec1to4), and
all class related discussions will be conducted via
[Campuswire](https://campuswire.com/c/G7EB4B888/). Class announcements
will be posted on Campuswire.

**Late Submissions**: Most assignments will be due just before midnight
on the due date. Students get a total allowance of three late days for
the howeworks and assignments for the whole semester. Any part of a late
day counts as one day. This late-day policy is intended to cover
unanticipated things like minor sickness, exams in other classes, etc.,
so that you do not have to ask for extensions. No late submissions will
be accepted if your budget is exhausted.



## COVID-19 Issues

The course is online for the entire semester. Students should follow all
guidelines from RPI related to health and safety for themselves and
other campus members. All illness related accommodations will require
officially approved excuse from RPI.

Students who are ill, under quarantine for COVID-19, or suspect they are
ill will report that to Student Life. Student Life will verify and
notify all faculty who have that student. Once notification is made, all
faculty will make every reasonable effort to accommodate the studentâ€™s
absence and will communicate that accommodation directly to the student.
Failure to make an appropriate accommodation for a verified or
reasonably suspected case of illness may be appealable under the student
grade appeal process. Students who need to report an illness should
contact the Student Health Center via email or call 518-276-6287. For
student seen off campus, a student may request an excused absence via
http://www.bit.ly/rpiabsence with an uploaded doctor's note that excuses
them.


## Academic Integrity

Students must work independently on all course assignments. You may
consult other members of the class on the assignments, but you must
submit your own work. For instance you may discuss general approaches to
solving a problem, but you must implement the solution on your own
(similarity detection software may be used). **Anytime you borrow
material from the web or elsewhere, you must acknowledge the source**.
Copying and pasting from published sources or the internet is considered
plagiarism and is not acceptable. Plagiarized work will receive an
automatic grade of zero.

Student-teacher relationships are built on trust. Acts which violate
this trust undermine the educational process. The Rensselaer Handbook of
Student Rights and Responsibilities and The Rensselaer Graduate Student
Supplement define various forms of Academic Dishonesty and procedures
for responding to them. **Submission of any assignment that is in
violation with these policies will result in a penalty that is deemed by
the instructor to be appropriate to the infraction ranging from a grade
of zero on the assignment in question, to failure of the class as a
whole. The student will also be reported to the Dean of Students or the
Dean of Graduate Education as appropriate**. Note that academic
dishonesty will be dealt with severely and will be reported to the Dean
of Students. If you have any questions concerning this policy before
submitting an assignment, please ask for clarification.
