.. title: CSCI4969-6969 Syllabus 
.. slug: mlib_syllabus
.. date: 2020-03-30 09:21:31 UTC-04:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text

This course focuses on machine learning algorithms for analyzing
biological data. The course will introduce the main topics in this area,
such as analysis of genome sequences, protein structures, gene networks,
and so on. We will cover some of the traditional algorithms for these
tasks, but the main focus is on the role of deep learning and data
mining in computational biology and bioinformatics.

Introduction
------------

This course focuses on machine learning algorithms for analyzing
biological data. The course will introduce the main topics in this area,
such as analysis of genome sequences, protein structures, gene networks,
and so on. We will cover some of the traditional algorithms for these
tasks, but the main focus is on the role of deep learning and data
mining in computational biology and bioinformatics.

Learning Objectives
-------------------

After taking this course students will be

* knowledgeable about the fundamental bioinformatics tasks like sequence
  and structure analysis and evolution, biological networks, and machine
  learning methods in bioinformatics

* able to understand the key algorithms for the main tasks

* able to implement and apply the techniques to real world datasets

Prerequisites
-------------

Prior knowledge of biology is not required. Prior exposure to linear
algebra, and probability and statistics is a plus. You will be expected
to read cutting-edge machine learning papers on the course related
topics.

Assignments will require the use of Python as well as PyTorch and/or
Tensorflow. You'll be given accounts on the CCI cluster at RPI that has
state-of-the-art GPU nodes for deep learning.

Textbook
--------

There is no required text for the course. Reading materials will be posted online.

Grading Policy
--------------

Your grade will be a combination of the following items.

* **Assignments and HWs (50%)**: Assignments and HWs will be given
  throughout the semester. These will include an implementation
  component and can also have written questions.

* **Final Project (45%)**: You will implement cutting edge approaches
  from the literature and extend/improve them. You will read papers on
  the topic, implement and compare state-of-the-art methods, and write a
  report on your findings. Finally, you will present your projects in
  class. Final projects can be done in groups of at most two students.

* **Attendance (5%)**: Students are required to attend and participate
  in the class. You are also required to fill out the course assessment
  request. Late Submissions: Most assignments will be due just before
  midnight on the due date. Students can get an automatic one day
  extension for a 15% grade penalty. No late assignments will be
  accepted after the midnight following the due date.

Academic Integrity
------------------

Students must work independently on all course assignments. You may
consult other members of the class on the assignments, but you must
submit your own work. For instance you may discuss general approaches to
solving a problem, but you must implement the solution on your own
(similarity detection software may be used). Anytime you borrow material
from the web or elsewhere, you must acknowledge the source. Copying and
pasting from published sources or the internet is considered plagiarism
and is not acceptable. Plagiarized work will receive an automatic grade
of zero.

Student-teacher relationships are built on trust. Acts which violate
this trust undermine the educational process. The Rensselaer Handbook of
Student Rights and Responsibilities and The Rensselaer Graduate Student
Supplement define various forms of Academic Dishonesty and procedures
for responding to them. Submission of any assignment that is in
violation with these policies will result in a penalty that is deemed by
the instructor to be appropriate to the infraction ranging from a grade
of zero on the assignment in question, to failure of the class as a
whole. The student will also be reported to the Dean of Students or the
Dean of Graduate Education as appropriate. Note that academic dishonesty
will be dealt with severely and will be reported to the Dean of
Students. If you have any questions concerning this policy before
submitting an assignment, please ask for clarification.
