.. title: CSCI4390-6390 Syllabus 
.. slug: dm_syllabus
.. date: 2020-08-31 14:16:31 UTC-04:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text

Introduction
------------

This course will provide an introduction to the main topics in data
mining and knowledge discovery, including: algebraic and statistical
foundations, pattern mining, classification, regression, and clustering.
Emphasis will be laid on the algorithmic approach.


Learning Objectives
-------------------

**For CSCI-4390**: After taking this course students will be

* able to describe the fundamental data mining tasks like pattern
  mining, classification, regression and clustering

* able to analyze the key algorithms for the main tasks

* able to implement and apply the techniques to real world datasets

**For CSCI-6390**: After taking this course students will be

* able to describe the fundamental data mining tasks like pattern
  mining, classification, regression and clustering

* able to analyze the key algorithms for the main tasks

* able to implement and apply the techniques to real world datasets

* able to demonstrate understanding of more advanced topics in data
  mining

* able to implement more advanced algorithms


Prerequisites
-------------

You need a minimum of CS2300: Introduction to Algorithms. Linear algebra
forms the foundation of data mining and machine learning, and therefore
prior exposure to linear algebra is essentially a prerequisite. A good
knowledge of probability and statistics is also a plus. 

You are expected to know how to program. Class assignments will require
the use of `Python3 <https://www.python.org/>`_, especially using NumPy.

Textbook
--------

The following textbook is **required** for the course:

`Data Mining and Machine Learning: Fundamental Concepts and Algorithms
<https://dataminingbook.info/>`_ (2nd Edition), Mohammed J. Zaki and
Wagner Meira, Jr, Cambridge University Press, 2020.

Readings from the book will be posted on the course schedule,

All lecture notes and videos will be posted online on the course
webpage. 

Lectures & Videos
------------------

The lecture PDF and Video will be posted on the course webpage after
each class, typically before 5pm on each class day.

Check out the short video on `Successful Remote Learning <https://mediasite.mms.rpi.edu/Mediasite5/Play/3c69d5096dc5494eadcaba2b9c99189f1d>`_ which can help you get organized for remote classes.



Grading Policy
--------------

Your grade will be a combination of the following items. 

* **Assignments (40%)**: Assignments and HWs will be given throughout
  the semester. These will include an implementation component and can
  also have written questions. You can expect about 8-10 assignments
  over the semester. 

* **Exams (60%)**: There will be four exams covering the main topics of
  the course. The tentative exam dates are noted on the class schedule
  table. There is no comprehensive final exam. All exams are open book.

* **Class Participation**: Students are encouraged to participate in the
  class via attendance, discussions, and engagement on the Campuswire
  forum.
    
* **Late Submissions**: Most assignments will be due just before
  midnight on the due date. Students can get an automatic one day
  extension for a 15% grade penalty. No late assignments will be
  accepted after the midnight following the due date.

The grading for CSCI4390 and CSCI6390 will be done separately taking
into account the more advanced material required for CSCI6390 -- this
includes extra/in-depth questions on the exam, and implementation of
more advanced algorithms for the assignments. The letter grades
typically are also based on different ranges for the two sections.

All assignments and exams will be submitted online via **Submitty**:
https://submitty.cs.rpi.edu/courses/f20/csci4390, and all class related
discussions will be conducted via **Campuswire**:
https://campuswire.com/c/GC1A29D57/ . Class annoncements will be posted
on the course webpage and also posted on Campuswire.


COVID-19 Issues
----------------

The course is online for the entire semester. Students should follow all
guidelines from RPI related to health and safety for themselves and
other campus members. All illness related accommodations will require
officially approved excuse from RPI.

Students who are ill, under quarantine for COVID-19, or suspect they are
ill will report that to Student Life. Student Life will verify and
notify all faculty who have that student. Once notification is made, all
faculty will make every reasonable effort to accommodate the studentâ€™s
absence and will communicate that accommodation directly to the student.
Failure to make an appropriate accommodation for a verified or
reasonably suspected case of illness may be appealable under the student
grade appeal process. Students who need to report an illness should
contact the Student Health Center via email or call 518-276-6287. For
student seen off campus, a student may request an excused absence via
http://www.bit.ly/rpiabsence with an uploaded doctor's note that excuses
them.


Academic Integrity
------------------

Students must work independently on all course assignments. You may
consult other members of the class on the assignments, but you must
submit your own work. For instance you may discuss general approaches to
solving a problem, but you must implement the solution on your own
(similarity detection software may be used). **Anytime you borrow
material from the web or elsewhere, you must acknowledge the source**.
Copying and pasting from published sources or the internet is considered
plagiarism and is not acceptable. Plagiarized work will receive an
automatic grade of zero.

Student-teacher relationships are built on trust. Acts which violate
this trust undermine the educational process. The Rensselaer Handbook of
Student Rights and Responsibilities and The Rensselaer Graduate Student
Supplement define various forms of Academic Dishonesty and procedures
for responding to them. **Submission of any assignment that is in
violation with these policies will result in a penalty that is deemed by
the instructor to be appropriate to the infraction ranging from a grade
of zero on the assignment in question, to failure of the class as a
whole. The student will also be reported to the Dean of Students or the
Dean of Graduate Education as appropriate**. Note that academic
dishonesty will be dealt with severely and will be reported to the Dean
of Students. If you have any questions concerning this policy before
submitting an assignment, please ask for clarification.
